Ladies and gentlemen,
please welcome Vice President of
Development Technologies,
Ted Goldstein.
Thank you very much.
I'm going to talk about
Java at Apple today.
And Java--I'm going to
is in a class by itself at Apple.
It is a critical,
critical important technology.
You'll hear why.
And I think Apple is a
critically important member
of the Java family companies.
And we are extremely well
suited for each other.
People have heard me
talk about this before,
know that I think the two
are very well married.
Besides, I love apples and I love coffee.
We like to say that Apple loves Java.
Apple loves Java.
Great symbology and such.
Java is Apple's strategic
cross-platform technology.
For people who need to develop
applications that run on multiple
platforms--at least one of
two of you do need to run on
something other than Macintosh--we
think Java is the way to go.
And Apple has made a tremendous
commitment to Java to make that happen.
It is a key component of many,
many enterprise solutions,
including Apple's own
running of its business.
And we also think that Apple--and
Java is extremely important to
Apple itself because it has brought
many applications to Mac OS X.
And that in one swoop,
we were able to bring in and make
beautiful Acro interfaces for many,
many applications.
Often with no tuning at all or maybe
with just a little bit of tuning,
things can become letter
sharp and very perfect.
And technologies and techniques that
we've done are making that even better.
And you're going to hear today about
some of the infrastructure we've
changed and improved to make Java on
Mac OS X the best it can possibly be
and to be a full first-class citizen
with all--everything else that
Apple does of Cocoa and Carbon and such.
But first, let's talk about Java and
where it fits in the landscape.
So when we think about
programming languages and great
languages of classic time,
we think about things
like Fortran and COBOL.
These are great business
processing languages,
great scientific languages.
And, you know,
I want to actually hand it to Microsoft.
They've made a language that's about
as popular as COBOL and Fortran,
something called C#.
I think that's, you know,
very thankful for Microsoft to remind
us again about the bottom of the scale.
Basic and Perl far,
far outstrip what's going on at that end,
and that's because of the accessibility.
C and C++,
which are the main languages that
people develop desktop applications in,
dwarfs even those.
But Java is the monster.
Java is at 51 percent market share.
It's going to take a long time for
languages like C# or COBOL to catch up.
And I think it's critically
important to realize that,
because while the Microsoft PR machine
is manufacturing information about C#,
Java is the winner.
Java is the winner and enjoys
the mind share at universities.
We hire summer interns at Apple,
and almost unanimously,
if they've had any
programming classes at all,
they've had programming classes in Java.
And they are well-trained,
and it helps us both to mold what
they do for the technology they
develop at Apple and for the languages
that we develop applications in.
So really, we feel very comfortable,
very comfortable with Java as
a fundamental mainstay of the
Apple development tools story.
and David Javademand has increased.
There are now 3 million
Java programmers out there.
Over half of the world's
PCs have Java natively installed.
HP and Dell have recently signed--they
have copied Apple and are now
shipping Java as part of the platform
and are shipping Sun's latest
version of Java that we are shipping.
And one of the nice things that
I'm happy to say is that Sun has
recommitted itself to desktop Java.
For many years,
you saw them putting their attention
on either end--on the enterprise
side and on the micro-Java,
J2ME, Java in the phones and smart cards,
which I'm very happy about.
But, you know, somehow there seemed to be
something missing from the
middle on the desktop platform.
And I'm very glad to see
it this year's Java 1.
We saw a tremendous burst of enthusiasm,
of renewed energy,
of revising JSRs and such.
And I think that this
is extremely important.
All these factors together
show that Java has legs.
It has long and sustained spirit
to create great applications.
We use Java ourselves
to run our business.
So when we think about the kinds
of applications that it takes
to bring money into the company,
right, to do the accounting services,
to do the financial reconciliation,
and website, Java itself is perfect as a
business enterprise application.
And Matt, let's begin.
Switch.
Do you hear the sound?
No?
No sound?
Nope.
So this is -- I'll do a voiceover, then.
Apple uses Java for SAP.
All of our sales people use
Java in its -- to book its numbers.
Our website is used -- uses Java,
and is based on WebObjects technology.
Apple Music Store, 99 cents a click,
and this is critically important.
Apple technology in every facet
is devoted in many ways to create
a tremendous desktop application
experience to create and as well to
create a tremendous server experience.
And these things combined together,
Java is a critical element.
When we talk about and we
celebrate many applications,
such as iTunes and such,
these are complementary
technologies to provide that
fabulous interactive experience,
but also Java is part of that.
Java is also in the products that
we sell and we develop ourselves.
So, of course,
we ship J2SE in Jaguar and in
Panther and in Mac OS X server.
.Mac is built itself
using the Java technology.
So the dynamic creation of the
web pages uses the WebObjects
application server and in many ways
also hooks up to various third-party
Java application servers as well.
and, of course, our WebObjects platform,
which runs not only on Mac OS X but on
Solaris and on Windows 2000 platforms.
That it itself is a portable applications
environment to create applications
for server-based applications.
So let's also talk about applications
that you've brought to Mac OS X.
Shall we switch?
So here, for example, Smart Money,
terrific application for monitoring.
This is--what is this one?
Can't see.
Borland--this is JBuilder IDE.
Thinkfree,
terrific word processing system.
What was the name of this one?
Gawker, right.
So Gawker is an
understanding tool for Java,
for understanding the Web and such.
The Visual Cthaurus from Plum Design.
Many, many applications,
all having tremendous visual appeal
using the interactive approach.
Why don't we flip back?
Yeah, good.
We also want to introduce a
new application server on the
Mac OS X platform called JBoss.
This is something that
you've asked us for.
It allows you to deploy
enterprise Java beans.
It is inspired by J2E.
It has incorporated in it, as part of it,
Apache's Tomcat system.
One of the things we like about
it is it's very good for hosting
WebObjects 5.2.2 web applications,
and it fits extremely well and
integrated into the Apache web services.
And one of the things
that we like about JBoss,
of course,
is it is a cross-platform standard.
It has that capabilities.
Our understanding is roughly
about 40 percent of people who
do this type of application are
supporting and running JBoss,
including--and about of those,
70 percent of those companies
that use JBoss have deployed it.
So it makes JBoss actually,
I think--I believe the largest--largest
of the J2E-like application servers.
For more information on JBoss,
we'll be talking about that in the 605
Web Objects in J2EE session and in the
612 Enterprise App Deployment section.
So great,
great new technology that I think you'll
enjoy using and which has a tremendous
amount of appeal for our customers.
Um, the thing that we'd like to say,
and critically important is,
Java is in every Mac OS X box.
It's bundled in every system.
We're including -- in
the Panther release,
we've included both Java 1.3 and 1.4.
There's slightly, subtly different APIs.
Some applications prefer 1.3.
Some will prefer 1.4.
And Apple tools support Java.
We're very focused on this.
The new Xcode tools will be supporting
Java fully in the GM release.
But, in fact, even today,
it will support it with the
Jam-based build system that
we've had for several years.
JBoss will now be included in
the Mac OS X server product.
So you can see that Java really is
getting very rich and fully integrated
into all aspects of what Apple does.
I think one of the things that Apple is
very focused on is improving performance.
And so J2SE technology,
just-in-time compilation,
is critically helpful for
making things go faster to--as
your application is running,
the Java virtual machine is optimizing.
We've put in technologies to optimize
and improve for the new G5 system.
G5 is, in fact, a perfect machine,
and there are hardware features
designed specifically to support Java.
And you'll see that some of the
scientific benchmarks and floating-point
benchmarks Java is terrific on.
We've added in support for the new I/O,
extremely fast streaming I/O into
the Java application environment,
and support to allow you for
your applications to select
between different versions.
One of the things that I think
is as a Java programmer,
you can actually be much more insulated
from the hardware architecture,
whereas if you're developing
in C or C++ or Objective-C,
you do have to actually know,
are you running on all of G3, G4, or G5?
Or you can optimize your code
and select in the compiler,
GCC compiler,
to target specific hardware platforms.
In Java, that worry goes away.
Because your application is dynamically
loaded and the GCC compiler selects
on the fly what it's going-- and knows
what hardware it is being executed on,
it can choose the best
optimization technology for you.
So this is one of the things
that makes Java and this type
of just-in-time compilation
technology an extremely good match,
especially when you have multiple
machine architectures you're targeting.
I think one of the things
that is also very interesting
here is no matter where we go,
when we get to G6, 7, 8, 9, 10, whatever,
you'll know that your Java application
is architected in such a way
that it is upwardly migratable.
And so the applications you create today
are going to have a future role and a
future life in a binary-compatible way.
One of the things that is really great
about the new Java 1.4 implementation
from Apple is we've made some big
changes in how we've implemented Java.
Previously, Java was built on a
Carbon substructure and various layers.
That allowed us to have some
support for Mac OS 9 days,
but also tremendous--and to
migrate over to Mac OS X.
Much as many of you developers
who develop Carbon applications,
you wanted to deploy both on 9 and 10.
But, of course,
now that we are fully on 10,
and really 9 is sort of a dot
disappearing in the rearview mirror,
we actually took the time to reengineer
from the ground up the 1.4 environment.
So previously, with Java 1.3.1,
As provided from Sun,
there is 1,842 classes.
From Sun we get in 1.4 almost 3,000,
2991 classes.
But if you look at it,
the code that Apple adds on top of it,
right,
in the 1.3 case we had to put in about
900 classes of code to connect it up
to Carbon and the Carbon APIs and such.
In 1.4, we're hooking up to Cocoa.
We've only had to add 300,
much less code,
and yet we have more functionality,
more infrastructure that we
have to bind to provided by Sun.
And what's interesting here is
that there's a very nice match,
a very sweet marriage, if you will,
between Java and the Cocoa and
Objective-C environments.
Many of the people, in fact,
who designed Sun's window swing system
actually were original Nextians.
So it's not... It's illogical
that that should be true.
So one of the nice things
here is with less code,
it then helps Apple put its attention
on issues of fit and finish and
performance and other things.
So this is one of the things
I'm really proud of in the
Carbon to Cocoa transition.
And with that,
I want to invite up Scott Adler,
the Mac OS X Classes Technical Lead.
Thanks a lot, Ted.
So Ted's done a really good job of
explaining why Java's important to us at
Apple and some of the basic things we've
done in 1.4 in our new architecture.
But I want to talk a little bit
about where we've come from.
So we can look at a timeline here,
and you can see that back
here we had Mac OS X,
and we shipped Java 1.3 with Mac OS X,
and then 10.1 we shipped Java 1.3.1,
but that's all way in the past.
Then we had our 1.3.1
update that we shipped,
plus a 1.3.1 version
that came with Jaguar,
and then recently we shipped
another version of 1.3.
But you can see we have fairly
regular releases of our Java platform.
Now, over the past year,
we shipped a year ago,
a little over a year ago,
we shipped a 1.4 preview that was still
based off of our Carbon APIs at the WWDC.
Then, from November to about February,
we shipped,
must have been between 10 to 20
developer previews of our 1.4.1 Java JDK.
So the deal is here is we were shipping
you our code as we were working on it,
and we got lots of feedback from you.
We got so much feedback that
we kept on adding to this and
doing more developer releases,
and this was a new thing for us,
where we were shipping out things to you,
and any ADC member could
download our 1.4.1.
So this was a great way to get
feedback directly from you without just
dumping a release on you and saying,
oh, my application doesn't work.
So we took all that feedback,
and then we released Java 1.4.1
in March of this year.
So what we've been doing since then
is we've been working on fixing all
the bugs and improving performance.
So what you have right now is
you have a Panther preview.
That has a version of
1.4.1 bundled inside of it.
And also you can download
a 1.4.1 update preview.
There will be eventually a 1.4.1 update,
but there's a preview
available for all ADC members.
So you can, again, download this and then
tell us what things,
what issues you have.
There's so many Java programs out there
that our best bet is for you to try
out your application and let us know
if there are issues specific to you.
So what you can see with this
timeline is that we have all
these regular releases of Java,
and we now have 1.4 and 1.3,
and we still have regular releases
of 1.4 going on into the future.
And you can see that we have our
releases with the operating system,
and obviously we're going to have
1.4 and 1.3 released with Panther.
So multiple version support,
we've been talking about this.
If you were here a couple years ago,
we had one version of Java on
Mac OS X and that was one through
one and that's what you got.
As opposed to other platforms where you
can install whatever version happens to
work with your application and everyone
had to install their own JREs and it
gets all confusing because you then have
like six different JREs on your system.
So we have a version that we ship.
Now we have two versions.
So you have to be able
to handle two versions.
Well we knew we had to have
backward compatibility.
Apps that worked with one through one
and may have issues with the new APIs in
one through one still have to work.
So our double clickable applications
will still work with one through one.
But we also have to allow
you to specify the version.
So you can specify it the same way
that Java Web Start does by saying what
version or hire you work with or saying
I'm locked into a specific version.
So that's really easy for you to do.
So you can ship your apps working
with whatever version that you need.
And we're also gonna include
both of them in Panther.
Now if you have a one four app,
you can be confident that your users will
be able to have it because we're shipping
one four through software update.
Most people just
automatically download it.
I know my aunt downloaded it.
She didn't even realize it.
So we have over a million
downloads of one four one.
And we're gonna keep shipping our
updates to one four as software updates.
And then when Panther comes along,
it will be bundled right inside the OS.
So you'll have both of
them right side by side.
One through one apps
can run one four apps.
Everything's happy.
So now I want to talk a little
bit about the Java platform.
If you were here two
weeks ago at Moscone,
at the old Moscone,
there was Java 1 going on.
And they talk all about
the Java platform.
And it's huge.
You probably know about it.
You're probably a Java developer.
But the platform is pretty huge.
I just want to run through really
quickly the 1.3 to 1.4 differences.
So we have all the OS releases
that it runs on the bottom.
And then we have the
actual virtual machine,
or the runtime as we like to call it,
which includes all the hotspot compiler.
And it's small on this chart.
But it's actually a big deal.
There's a lot of stuff in
there going on for figuring
out when to compile your code.
Then we have all the core APIs.
This is the basic stuff
in your application.
This is things like all the collection
classes to make it easy to do sorts,
all the networking classes,
utility string classes,
all the basic things that
Java just can handle for you.
Then you have your integration APIs,
things like connecting to databases
and remote method invocations.
Then on top of that, the UI toolkit,
which Swing and AWT are obviously the
most basic things in that toolkit.
And then you also have input methods
for getting foreign language support,
Java 2D if you just are
a graphics application,
accessibility support,
which is definitely a
big user interface issue,
and sound support.
Then on top of that are
alternative deployment techniques,
other than just jars and
double-clickable applications,
things like Java Web Start and
the Java plugin for applets.
Now, when we went from 1.3 to 1.4,
there were some new packages,
brand new packages,
some extensions that were bundled in,
some other things that people
just wanted that Sun added to 1.4.
And people look at this and say, hey,
that's all that's in 1.4, no big deal.
Well, actually,
all of these packages have
had major API changes.
Swing has had brand new components,
AWT has had lots of fixes,
and there's just... There's all lists
of API changes across the board.
And then there also are all
the other packages that have
been touched or changed,
that have bug fixes inside
of and under the covers.
Especially the hotspot compiler in VM,
there's lots of changes
between 1.3 and 1.4,
and almost none of them
will... You actually have to do
anything to take advantage of.
There are just things that
happen under the covers that
make your application run better.
But it's things that we implement.
So now I want to talk a little bit
about Java 1.4 on Mac OS X and what
the performance thinks we've changed.
So first, starting at the bottom,
there's the runtime improvements.
So the biggest thing here is that
these will directly affect all your
server and scientific applications.
So any runtime improvements we make,
immediately, if we fix floating point,
we make it work faster,
your server applications will
just start working faster.
We have some things like aggressive
inlining that's been implemented,
the new I/O API that we've
talked about earlier.
And then, of course,
the biggest thing that you get for
free is support for new hardware.
Now, this morning in the keynote,
you heard some talk about a developer who
ported their application to work on the
G5 and recompiled in something like 15,
20 minutes.
Well, you don't have to do that.
You guys get that for free.
Your class files come over.
They run through our compiler,
which is now optimized for the G5.
So let's just take an example.
There's a benchmark,
which is the CIMARC benchmark.
It's a scientific calculation benchmark.
And we just looked at
the composite score.
And we're going to do
a little bit of a test.
So on a -- let's see,
on a G4 1.4 gigahertz dual machine,
we score 110,
which leaves us somewhere in the
50 -- top 50 compilers out there.
Now, if we look at the new machine,
which is a 2.0 gigahertz dual,
we score now 232,
which brings us into the top 10.
And this is just with a couple
optimizations for the G5.
So we already are taking more than 100
percent improvement on this one score,
just from optimizing things like
our long instructions and all of the
things that the G5 can take care of.
So this is some great news
for your applications,
because you just get this.
When you run on the new hardware,
your apps will be that much faster.
So I really encourage you
to go look at session 625.
There is more info about the
CIMARC composite score and
all the different portions
of CIMARC and what they did.
They'll actually break down how they
compile your byte codes into better
instructions on the G5 and how you
can set up your applications to better
take advantage of this information.
And then we'll take advantage
of this if you want to,
but again,
it'll just automatically happen for you.
So also in the graphics area,
we know we had a lot of work to do,
and so we put a lot of effort
into some graphics improvements.
So the biggest thing is that
we're faster across the board,
even on Jaguar systems,
this update should be faster for
your applications and graphics.
We heard a lot of criticism about this,
and we've tried to respond to it.
We did things like our graphics
system sits on top of Quartz,
and the Java graphics system
doesn't necessarily understand
all the intricacies of Quartz.
So we did things like
we know more about it.
So we put in a new state management
mechanism which should help
all your applications be faster
for basic drawing routines.
We also have lots of bug fixes.
So I have one benchmark I stole
from the performance session,
which is the Java wireframe demo,
which measures basic primitive lines
and maybe arcs drawing performance.
And in our 1.4.1 release,
we got 20 frames per second.
And then in our 1.4.1 update,
we ended up with 35 frames per second.
So you can see that's a pretty
significant improvement.
And then in our 1.4.1 update,
we had a significant increase
in just our update release.
So you can find out more about this
at the session again on Friday,
the performance session.
So now in Java 1.4,
there's also all the UI toolkits,
and I want to talk a
little bit about those.
So, AWT.
This is the big change we
made over the past year.
We changed the architecture of AWT.
So, AWT is the whole toolkit
that has the peer toolkit.
So, peers are these native
widgets that Java relates to.
So, AWT on Windows has Windows widgets.
AWT on Mac OS X now uses Cocoa widgets.
Now, the big deal here is it's
transparent to users.
They don't know whether
it's Carbon or Cocoa.
We don't want them to know.
But what happens is the Cocoa widgets
now have support for our native services.
So, the services menu just works.
The speech and spelling in AWT controls,
if you control-click
on your AWT text field,
you'll get that services menu,
and you'll be able to select
speech and speak those items,
or see the little red dashed underlines
and be able to get spelling right there,
or send something to a man
who's a Java developer.
So, we're not going to be able to get
that in the mail client because
the mail has implemented something
so you can say click send to mail.
The other thing is you get things like
the colors and the artwork automatically.
So,
if you use AWT colors or system colors,
those automatically are mapped
to our UI system colors.
So,
if you change the highlight color in an
application in the system preferences,
it'll automatically be reflected
in your application if you
use the highlight color.
Plus, there are things like input methods
are now supported in all of our AWT.
So, that means you can get your
input methods in the system.
So, you can get your complex fonts and
complex foreign language support,
and also things like Inkwell.
If you happen to have a tablet,
you could use Inkwell right
in your AWT text fields.
Plus,
we have accessibility for our AWT widgets
and also for some of our swing widgets,
and that means you can script everything.
You have things available,
accessibility can get to it,
you can use it using
UI scripting in Apple script.
So the swing Aqua look and feel.
This has been rewritten with
the architecture change to use
the native Cocoa rendering.
So what that means is when
you draw a swing widget,
instead of pulling the whole thing into
Java and trying to draw it in Java,
what we do is we go down into the
native code and behind the scenes
draw it with the same routines
that Cocoa uses to draw it.
So when you ask for a swing button,
it's actually drawing a Cocoa button
behind the scenes and then
putting a lightweight view
of that thing up on the screen.
So it means that your components will
be more consistent with other swing
apps and with other native apps.
The other thing-- excuse me.
Let me grab a drink.
So the other benefits you get
from this is the native menu bar.
You can actually use the menu bar at
the top of the screen if you want.
Plus, you can also get the
brushed metal look and feel,
if you want.
You can set a property,
get brushed metal, and then you can set
backgrounds on windows,
and they all of a sudden
become translucent windows.
And it's really cool.
You can make--if you
do a non-title window,
you can make the background transparent.
You just have floating swing controls,
if you want.
It's kind of cool.
There also are some new widgets.
There's the indeterminate progress bar,
the spinner, and plus we have new
internationalization support.
So with that,
there's more info on--at session 608.
They'll be talking about
creating great Java applications.
They'll talk about how to
do all these customizations.
Now I'd like to introduce Greg Bolsinga,
whose title is up here.
That is-- Hi.
Demo machine two, please.
I've got a pure Java swing
application here.
This is it right here.
It's using the Aqua swing look and feel,
and in this particular case,
I've set it to use the
brushed metal look.
On "Jaguar," we had
some trouble with this,
but with the Cocoa fixes
that we got from the system,
now it works,
and we didn't-- I don't believe we
had to do any changes to get that.
So your Java swing program will look
and behave as Mac OS X users expect.
What I'm going to be showing you today
is how the Java accessibility has been
tied into the Mac OS X accessibility,
and you get all these
great features for free.
Mac OS X accessibility allows your
program to be used by all users,
people who may not be able to use a mouse
or see the screen or hear or some such,
but there's a lot of features that are
cool for a whole lot of people as well.
So what you're going to use are
pure AWT and swing components.
If you have a custom component control,
you'd have to integrate it with
the Java accessibility APIs,
and then when you use it on Mac OS X,
you'll just get it for free.
So the first thing I'm going to show
you is the spoken user interface.
It's part of the speech,
and if you have it do
the text under the mouse,
it will read it out loud.
So again... Scott.
These are just pure Java widgets
that are getting this for free.
So it's a pretty easy
to use screen reader.
And we also have speech recognition.
You'll see here in speech recognition
that there's the front window commands.
I'm not doing that in here
because the microphones in the
big room don't work too well.
But what I could do is go to
this program and say add image,
and it would click on it for me.
This comes to you for free with Java.
You have to do no additional
Java programming nor any
native Mac OS X programming.
And here's another really cool feature
that we have is the UI scripting.
Pardon me.
So this is a JavaScript that's
going to click on buttons.
And it's going to fill out this
little goofy program I wrote
while the script is running.
So I'll have it tell you about it.
Thanks, Greg.
First I'll add the Apple logo.
Now adding the Java logo.
There we go.
Now I'll add a picture of Greg.
So it's filling out all
these text fields as it goes.
And lastly, a picture of Scott.
Now it will start bouncing around.
Now let's turn on the transparency.
and Beth Dinkley.
Okay, so what we have here is
still a pure Java program.
We used--
We used standard AWT components
and were able to script them.
And this is pure Java.
You'll notice this transparent
window I have here.
All I have is a Java AWT window where
I've set the background color to have an
alpha and the Quartz Extreme compositing
takes care of the rest of it for us.
You can hear more about
Mac OS X accessibility
at session 421 on Friday.
And I'll have more about this
program on Thursday in session 620.
So I'm going to run one more thing
and it's going to open a website
where you can learn about it.
Now back to you, Scott.
Cool.
Before you hang that up,
I just want to show them
the other thing you added.
So Greg's been working on
this demo just for like a day,
and I said it would be really
cool if everything blew up.
So he had something where he
could add a whole bunch of images
and just have things blow up.
So I just thought that was kind of cool.
So, this really shows things like,
you know, your transparent window,
the scripting.
Now, what you don't realize
is that's all swing.
Those aren't Cocoa controls.
The system doesn't know that
those are Cocoa elements in there.
If it was AWT, it would know about that.
But these are swing controls.
So, we implemented things so that
your swing controls can get
access to the outside world.
And so that any other developer
who goes in can see that,
yes, there is a button there.
Even though that's a J button behind
the scenes which on any other platform,
they just think it's lightweight.
I don't know what it is.
On our platform, we've exposed that to
our accessibility APIs.
So, this is a big advantage to your swing
applications because AWT applications
are kind of boring sometimes.
And swing applications
can be really complex.
And you can also -- is it true, Greg,
you can expose your
own custom components?
Greg Schleusner: Yes, it is.
You just tie them in with the standard
Java accessibility APIs provided by Sun.
Oh, one thing I forgot to mention.
On other platforms,
to get Java to native accessibility,
you'd have to do an additional
download -- we don't believe
in additional Java downloads
except when it's a new release,
I guess.
But -- so you would just get Java to
Mac OS X accessibility linkage for free.
Great.
Thanks a lot, Greg.
Greg Schleusner: Thank you.
[Transcript missing]
So again,
if you want more information about these,
go to the
Creating Great Java Applications,
that's session 608.
You'll see at the end all
the times for these sessions.
So now we have the other thing,
which is tying yourself
into some of Apple's APIs.
Now,
some people might not want to do this,
but there's a lot of
good reasons to do this.
We have some great things that
you can do on the Mac with Java,
and they're exciting, actually.
The whole WebKit SDK allows you to build
WebKit applications that you can just
embed Java applets right inside of.
So that's really cool.
Then the other way around is
you can take a Java application,
and you can embed a Cocoa View inside
of your Java application.
So you can take some custom
Cocoa component and embed it right
inside of your swing application,
and just have it sitting there
interacting with the user just
alongside all of your swing controls.
And it's really cool.
It means you can take almost anything
from other projects and just pull
it into your Java application.
There also are ways to get to other
APIs through native interfaces to get
to things like our disk burning API,
our cryptography APIs.
It's really cool,
and you'll see some of this.
But you can also do it on your own.
So you can do it on your own.
And you can do this in
some of the later sessions,
building a disk burning program
with almost all pure Java,
with very little native code.
But then you get all of
the disk burning utilities.
We also have QuickTime for Java 6.1,
which is being seeded.
It's a developer seed,
if I remember correctly.
It has new bindings
for new QuickTime APIs.
So it's a little different than
the QuickTime for Java that
you might have used with 1.3.
The big deal here is that it
works with 1.4 on Mac OS X.
And I recommend you open it.
You all check it out.
Anyone who's used
QuickTime for Java before,
check it out.
Give us feedback on it.
Talk to the QuickTime team,
because they want a lot
of feedback on this.
And they actually are having a session.
Session 708 is where you can learn
all about the new QuickTime APIs.
And I really encourage you,
if you're a QuickTime developer
who uses Java,
who's used the old QuickTime for Java,
or has taken a look at the new one,
to go there and give your feedback and
learn all about it at that session.
There's also some sessions on WebKit,
session 4.0, 4.20.
We'll talk all about WebKit and how you
can get WebKit in your own application,
which means you can then have access
to applets in your application.
And then also session 6.20,
we'll talk in-depth about these features,
native integration on Mac OS X.
So you can learn all about the
different ways to embed native
services in your application.
So now I'm going to do a quick
demo of access to native services,
all the extensions.
So if we can switch to demo machine one.
So what you see here is this is
actually a sample app I downloaded
from our developer site.
And it's actually something that
lets me connect to video cameras,
which was really cool because we
announced a new video camera today.
I didn't even know.
So I made this app,
and it was developed by Ted and
our DTS group to show how to embed
Cocoa components inside of a Java app.
So how you can get some
native functionality inside
of your pure Java app.
So I just gave it this great icon,
and I named it after
my favorite '80s name,
Super Video Pro.
So it's got a real icon.
It actually is a real application.
Everyone thinks it's just
a plain old application.
They don't know there's
Java under the covers.
So it's already launched here.
So here's my camera view.
Now, this is really exciting.
It doesn't look like much.
Well, what's actually here is this area
right here is a Cocoa component.
Inside of this Cocoa component
is an NS Quick Draw view,
which is then talking to QuickTime.
So we've got everything in
this one little application.
Now, according to Java,
there's just a component in there
that's going to give us pixels.
And it's just going to fill the screen,
fill this section of the window.
So as soon as I say connect--
There I am.
So this is getting stuff
directly from QuickTime.
There's nothing tricky going on here.
You can download this exact source.
So I can just pick this up.
Maybe not.
I'll just leave this right here.
I don't know how that's attached there.
I was going to show you what
the demo guy is doing back here,
but I don't think we'll
be able to see him.
So you can see that we're getting live
stuff right here in our application.
And then there's some other things,
like I used extended AWT,
and I added an about box with
some custom Java inside of it.
So just to show that
there's real Java in here,
I just threw some goofy
things in my about box.
And this is just a regular old
Java sample I threw in here.
And I can click here and see Ted,
who wrote the sample,
and all this exciting stuff.
So this just means you can do
your own about box in here.
And then we also have
the Preferences menu.
So this, again, is hooked up to just
my plain old Java code,
and I can change any preferences.
So one of the cool preferences in
here is show DV setup when connecting.
So if you turn this on, I say OK,
and then I stop.
And now I'm stopped.
Now if I reconnect--
It goes directly to the native DV setup,
video setup.
So this is now no longer Java code.
This is a native window that's come
up inside of my Java application.
It took, I think,
one parameter that I passed to
the QuickTime setup that says
now I want this native window.
And now I get things like
our vector scope in here.
So there's all these cool things.
We can see what color am
I and things like that.
You can also decide if
you have other sources,
you can choose different
videos and things like that.
So this is a real easy way to
get to native functionality
in your Java application.
Okay.
Let's go back to slides.
So web integration.
When you use Java,
most of you when you develop Java,
you're developing
Java applications or applets.
Now a lot of users run into applets all
the time and don't even know about it.
So we have to do a good
job with web integration.
So the biggest thing is Safari.
Safari is our browser,
our main browser on our platform,
and we have to have good
applet support for it.
So we have 1.4 applet support in Safari.
Safari is a Cocoa program.
And so our new Cocoa architecture
works really well with Safari.
So you actually have a much more seamless
integration between Safari and our 1.4.1.
So now we can actually say that we
have more applets than ever running on
Mac OS X using the combination of Safari.
You also have applets
inside of Internet Explorer.
We also are working on a 1.4 plugin
that will work with Carbon browsers.
So all those people who are
writing Carbon browsers out there,
maybe they won't be around for long
because of Web Kit and how cool it is.
But there still are some people
who are writing Carbon browsers,
and people may want to embed
their applets inside of there.
So we're going to have a way to put
1.4 content inside of those browsers.
And then Java Web Start,
which is kind of lonely at the end here,
but it's actually a really
important technology.
And not that many people know about it,
but it's a way to deliver
applications through a web browser.
So the deal with Web Start is that it's
a Sun-specified way of doing things,
and you can have your,
your JAR file up on a server somewhere,
and you just have a link to a JNLP file,
which is the thing that will
then launch your application.
And you click in the web browser,
and it downloads your JAR file,
puts it in a cache, and then creates-- it
runs the application.
And on the Mac,
we've actually extended that so that
if you download that more than once,
you could actually have the option to
create a double-clickable application
out of your Web Start JNLP file.
So what will happen is you'll then
end up with an application bundle
that knows where it came from.
So you have all the
advantages of Web Start,
because one of the big things
about Web Start is that you can
actually go to the original website
every time you start the app and
check to see if there are updates.
You can automatically
put updates out there,
and then anyone who's using your
app will get an announcement
saying there's an update.
Do they want to download it?
So there are a lot of things
there where people want to
deploy through the browser,
but don't want to be an applet
inside the browser process.
They want to download something
and not just be a DMG file
or something like that.
And this is a cross-platform way.
It works on Windows with other JREs.
is.
So there'll be a lot of talk about this
at the Java on the Web session 619.
There's a lot of details about
the new things in Safari.
We actually have support
for cookies in Safari now,
which is a big deal.
And then all the details about the new
plug-in and many details about how to
specify your Java Web Start application.
So Java moving forward.
So we've been talking about our
Java update and other things like that.
Let's talk a little more detail about it.
So the future of Java and Mac OS X.
The first thing in our future
is the 141 update for MAC for
for Jaguar Mac OS X 10.2.
So what's in that?
Well, we have hundreds of bug fixes.
We've been fixing lots of bugs.
We've been getting the biggest
issues and knocking those down.
The other thing that we've
been working on a lot has
been performance enhancements.
So what's the biggest thing
that we've been working on?
There are graphics
performance enhancements,
which you saw some of and you'll see more
of on Friday if you go to that session.
The VM,
which has been optimized for for the G5.
But there also are some
other optimizations in there
that can work on Jaguar.
And then Aqua has had
some improvements in it.
So we actually have some updates
for our Aqua look and feel
and to our AWT components.
And the big thing here is that it'll
be developed as a software update.
Now it's available to you through
ADC download as a preview.
And we really encourage you to
download it try out your applications.
See if you have any other
issues that we don't know about
and give us feedback on it.
So now I want to give you a little demo
of one of the things that we've seen in
our release versus our software update.
So if we can get demo machine one.
This is a little
application called Robocode.
How many of you out there
know about Robocode?
How many of you tried
running Robocode on 1.4?
Okay.
So be lucky you haven't because
you're about to see what
Robocode looks like on 1.4.
So Robocode is actually an
interesting application.
It's developed by IBM's AlphaWorks,
and it's a program where you program
little AI robots in Java that are
subclassed off of a robot type,
and you can compile your
robots and everything.
It's very cool,
and it's very cool to us developers.
Outside people might not care about it,
but developers think it's really
cool because you actually get to,
you know, it's kind of like Core Wars and
all those kinds of things.
You get to program your robots and have
them face off in teams or whatever.
So this is a kind of
graphics-intensive kind of thing,
and this is running on our
1.4 release from March.
And if I just resume the battle.
You can see up here,
this is our frames per second,
which this was--I think one
of our developers deemed this
unacceptable performance,
which--
I think is completely correct.
So what did we do?
Well, we looked at this and we said we
know there's something wrong here.
We can do a little better.
So I'm going to switch from this
machine to demo machine two,
which even though we have
a rack of Xservs here,
this is the exact same configuration
machine as this one here.
You'll have to believe me on that.
And we set up the exact same battle
except it does random placement so the
guys aren't in the exact same location,
but you might be able
to notice a difference.
So this is running our 141 update 1.
And if I resume here,
now we're actually getting--let's--
We're getting 2022.
This is--let's see.
This is a little less than
what we were getting in our--
Oh, okay.
So we're getting about 20, 22.
This is a lot less than
we got in rehearsal,
but it's still an order
of magnitude better,
which is pretty good.
So what I wanted to do is
show you that we actually
have--let's cancel this battle.
Let's open a battle that I saved,
which is a really big
one here that I enjoy.
And let me pause that,
and I like doing this, too.
Let's see if this works.
Okay, we're only getting about
10 frames per second,
but it's probably because
we have another thing going.
But you can see that this is
actually an order of magnitude
better than what we had before.
And you can actually run this
in--it's actually usable now.
And we found out a couple
reasons why this was happening,
and we fixed those reasons.
And hopefully we can find out
why it's only 10 to 15 frames
per second here and not 30,
which I was getting in my
test run earlier today.
But that's still better than before.
So we can go off of this one.
So we can go back to slides.
So that's the update,
and now the future of Java is
actually going to be Panther.
That's the future of Apple.
So what's in Panther?
Well, what you got in Panther was
pretty close to what's in our
update that you can download now.
It's a little different.
There aren't all the
exact same bug fixes,
but we're going to have all
those bug fixes in there.
So when Panther is released,
it's going to have everything
that was in our update.
So 141 update 1 is going
to go out before Panther,
and then when Panther is final,
it's going to have everything that
was in that update plus all the
Panther graphics improvements.
So everything that Panther did,
we've -- what Ted told you earlier
is we've architected for the future,
and this is actually where we
start reaping the rewards of that
architecture because we're living
on top of all of the core APIs.
We live on top of core graphics.
We use all the text APIs.
So if you're at Scott Forsdall's
discussion about text.
We immediately get those
two times performance gains.
So every Panther performance improvement,
those will affect us.
Aqua improvements,
we're revving our Aqua look and feel
to match the new Aqua look for Panther.
Font performance is huge.
The font performance change in Panther,
and we should be gaining most of that.
Also things like the
improved IO performance.
And then the big deal with
Panther is that it will include 141,
so you can count on your applications
having 141 there if you need it.
You don't have to get
a download for Panther.
And then the other big thing which has
been mentioned in the last session and
this session is that JBoss is going
to be bundled with Mac OS X server.
So you can count on having something
that is close to the J2EE standard and be
able to run your J2EE applications there.
So with that,
I want to bring up Alan Samuel,
who is our Java Technologies Evangelist.
end a little bit today with actually
one of you from the audience,
a developer.
Now the story on this is my counterpart
actually in our Swedish office,
Mark Turner, actually we had,
I think he had a phone call one day,
told me a little bit about this
developer that he was working
with that had developed this
really cool product in Java.
Originally developed
on Windows and Solaris,
I believe.
I believe it's even over
a million lines of code,
a pretty hefty application.
It was in the video conferencing space.
My first thought when Mark told me this,
I was like, are these guys crazy?
Who's going to take this on in Java?
I want to show you guys
what these guys have done.
In a very, very short period of time,
they've taken this product,
and I think it's one of the
showcase applications on Mac OS X.
Unlike some of the things that
you saw today with our video
conferencing offer with iChat AV,
you know,
more of a peer-to-peer Mac-only solution,
their offering works on both Macintosh,
Windows, Linux, and Solaris.
It also offers a whole host of
things like whiteboarding and other
features to sort of more on the
lines of a groupware application.
But I don't want to
take too much more time.
I'd rather have you guys see it,
but I think no matter what application
framework this was developed in,
this is going to be a showcase
application for the platform.
So with that, I want to go ahead and
bring up Magnus Hedberg,
the chief strategy offer with Meritech,
and actually have him give you a
demo of their incredible product.
Thank you a lot.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
- Should we go to demo one?
- Just a second.
I want to make sure we are
online before we switch.
Oh, here we go.
Here we are online with Sweden.
I'm just turning on my microphone here.
What do you want the headset?
I'm going to put in my headset, too,
just to make sure that our colleague
Staffan can hear us in Sweden.
Do you hear us, Staffan?
That's good.
I'm actually going to turn the camera
around here so that you can see that
you have a very nice audience today.
This is one of the nice features with the
new EyeSight camera from Apple that you
can actually turn it around like this.
Thank you very much.
I've been looking at
you all week last week.
Yeah, I know.
It's terrible.
So, Staffan is tonight
with us from Stockholm,
Sweden.
And the reason I say night is because
it's pretty much night over there.
It certainly is.
If I'm out of sync, it has nothing to do
with the application,
but with the time zones.
What time is it?
3:00 AM.
OK.
We always like dedicated staff.
We don't have all the
dedicated staff online.
We have a few more actually here in the
background that I'm going to bring in.
One nice feature with this system
is that we can actually do a
little recording and playback.
So what I'm going to do now is
that I'm going to bring in some
of our friends from earlier
tonight before they left for home.
That's how we can deal with that.
I'm just going to press the play
button here and you will see
some more colleagues showing up.
And this is really the
beauty of the system,
group collaboration.
I'll now let Staffan run a little
talk about the application itself,
and then we'll get back and I'll finalize
talking about our Java experience.
So, Staffan, the word is yours.
Thank you very much.
I'll start with introducing myself a bit.
My name is Staffan Seadre,
and I'm sitting here in Stockholm,
Sweden, as Magnus said.
Just briefly about who we
are and where we come from.
Swedish software development
company started R&D back in '95,
mainly sponsored by Ericsson,
which is a fairly
well-known mobile company,
at least back here in
my end of the woods.
The purpose was to create a solution
that supported distributed projects
and mainly distance education.
Market demands led to that we
founded the company back in '98,
and since then we have a bit more than
130 clients that have verified the
solution and verified the technology.
So they have, together with us,
made what you see here today possible.
A part of our vision is to create
a truly distributed workplace.
And with that I mean,
you are right now somewhere around here,
and whoops, and I'm over there.
And that is a distributed workplace
in a sort of global scheme.
Very early this morning I had a bit
of a conversation with some clients
of ours in Sydney and in Perth.
Earlier, in the last week,
I was in contact with Germany,
with the UK, and even more so with our
development team that is
based way up north in Sweden,
almost close to the Arctic Circle.
So this kind of distributed workplace
is what we are--that's our world,
basically.
This is made possible through
convergence--a convergence of audio,
video, whiteboard chats that creates what
we believe to be very efficient
group collaboration over internet.
And that is over the public internet.
I'll guide--just take you through
some of the features here now.
What you see on the top of your screen
is what we call video for presence.
Basically,
it increases the sense of presence.
You see everybody's there.
You see if they pay
attention or if they nod off.
If they nod off, you're a speed up.
Everyone--all the participants have
a P button that stands for private,
meaning I can send private chats
to anyone in the audience or
any one of the participants.
And I can also have a private
conversation going on with one
particular participant without
disturbing the rest of the group.
Right now, you probably just see one or
two or a few participants here,
but I think the internal
record is close to 500 people
simultaneously in one session.
The voice quality--and I really
hope that you experience decent
quality over at your end.
We usually do.
Yes, we do.
Thank you.
You're welcome.
It's developed for use over Internet,
and since we don't really have any
quality of service over Internet,
it will have to be robust and
handle packet losses efficiently.
It's a wideband codec,
so it's a lot better than
traditional telephony.
And a lot cheaper.
The video screen,
the largest video screen that
you see on your right hand side,
is a strong tool because it
increases commitment considerably.
It's a lot easier to say "it will be done
Monday" over the phone and don't mean it,
than to include it in applications.
So it's a very good tool for
in-group environments when
you want to have things done.
The chat can of course
be used in any way,
but during a regular meeting,
use it to ask questions, spell names,
or type in URL, whatever.
That's my email address,
so in case you have any questions,
don't send me those.
Ask Magnus, since he's there.
Makes sense.
And last but definitely not least,
the whiteboard area.
Use it as I'm using it right now to
present stuff or make annotations.
Highlight stuff, share ideas,
and share documents, regardless of the
application that you're on.
I mean, you can be on an application
that I don't have on my machine,
but we can still share the
information and make annotations
and discuss the content.
This is made available now in
a cross-platform environment.
We are strong believers in
cross-platform communications.
The client that you see on your screen,
the big screen right now,
is available for Sun Solaris,
for Windows, for Linux, and,
as of tomorrow, for Windows.
Or for Mac.
It is 3:00 a.m.
in the morning.
It's out there.
It is.
Hang in there.
The server that makes
this meeting possible,
that creates this virtual meeting
room that we're in right now,
is also available for
a variety of platforms.
And as of tomorrow, for Mac OS X.
We are actually running this off an
X server located in Stockholm right now.
We don't want to prevent people
from participating in meetings.
That's why we have the client
software freely available.
So anyone can download the client
software and connect to the
server that is hosted by someone.
In this case, it's us.
The Java I've set as of
now has been encrypted,
108-bit encryption end-to-end,
meaning that regardless if someone
else is sitting on the server,
they cannot listen in
on our conversations.
That goes for all media, for video,
for voice, for chat, for whiteboard,
and so on and so forth.
So it's dead safe, which is crucial,
especially for professional users.
The audio, I mentioned it earlier,
is probably even more crucial
because voice is such a cornerstone
in all human interaction.
So I can lose video, maybe,
but I can't lose voice because then our
conversation is not really efficient.
That's why we are focused to
create a very robust solution that
handles network packet losses.
We can even lose up to 30 percent
packets and I will still make myself
understood on my broken English.
It's very easy to get up and running.
The client that you see
on your screen right now,
you will probably have it up
and running in five minutes.
Unless you're a technician,
because then you probably need
15 minutes since you just have to
fiddle around with all the settings.
The server is equally easy
to get up and running,
I would say.
You can have it up and running,
meaning creating these virtual meeting
rooms on a server and invite people
to join you in less than 30 minutes.
The whole solution is also NAT compatible
and very firewall friendly,
meaning it cuts through it like butter.
A nice feature is that you can
record and play back the sessions.
Say you missed your management meeting,
it's a very good thing that you can
listen in to what was actually decided,
since everything probably ended up
on your table since you were there.
It's also used especially in education.
Students can listen in on the
recorded lectures that they missed
for one reason or the other.
Take them 20 lectures at once and still
8 exams at the end of the semester.
That concludes the features.
So now I'll leave you with Magnus
that will guide you through some
of the experiences that we had
developing this for Mac OS X.
Thank you, Staffan.
You can hear the audience is impressed
by your ability to work late at night.
I guess you have a new future.
As Alan mentioned, we have our roots all
the way back in Java,
actually at the time
when it was called Oak,
back in 1994, 1995.
We worked very close with Sun.
And we later--it took us to like '99,
actually,
before we went onto the Windows platform.
And we have been staying away
from the Mac until Mac OS X.
That was a huge relief for
us because we have a lot of
users in the educational field,
and they really love the Mac.
And so do we these days.
It's beautiful.
And the way it comes across with a
Unix operating system in the bottom,
and we started playing
around with Java 1.3,
and the performance, it just sucked.
So once we got to know the
Worldwide Developer Team,
we started working with Java 1.4.1.
It was a breeze.
The service side,
it took us less than a day
to reuse the Linux version,
putting it on the Unix box.
The only thing we had to do was
to change the installation script.
That was about 15 minutes of work,
and we were up and running.
So we have been running this in an
XR environment since November last year,
and an uptime of more than six months.
Beautiful.
So it's really straightforward,
even though it's a very complex server
functionality on the server side.
When it comes to the client side,
it's a different story.
That's where we have had
our biggest challenges.
And that's really when we saw the big
improvements from Java 1.3 to 1.4.1.
Now this application is really usable,
as you have seen on the screen today.
Most people wouldn't have an idea,
a clue, that this is implemented in Java.
We have, of course,
had to pull off some tricks.
Pretty much the way the super video
demo was done earlier tonight,
we have been using the same
technology with QuickTime Video,
basically accessing the native code
for doing the rendering and grabbing.
And it comes out pretty good.
When it comes to audio,
we have always been working
very close to the hardware,
because that's really a need,
to be able to reduce latency
and to handle the packet loss,
etc.
We have had a lot of issues
in the world of Windows,
because every machine has
a different sound card,
and the operating system
is not that stable,
I must say,
when it comes to real-time audio.
When we come to the Mac OS X platform,
we have been astonished about how
smoothly and how easily it was to
implement this great audio quality.
It just works, and it works so well.
So if you want to have
great audio quality,
it's OS X to go.
We have also truly appreciated
the support which you find on
OS X and the ease to access the
PDF functionality supported by Quartz.
And it just took us a day of work
to have full support to import
PDF into our interactive whiteboard.
And that's also really neat,
the ability to do that.
And what we see is how easy it
is to develop in terms of how
difficult it many times can be
to develop on other platforms.
such as the windows.
And what we have learned is really
that it takes collaboration.
And we have been working very
closely with the Worldwide
Developer Team over the last,
I would say, six months,
or maybe even longer.
And we really love the
brushed metal look.
And to be honest,
it really doesn't look this beautiful
if you just do it with Java.
You have to pull some tricks.
But with the Worldwide
Developer Team that is available to you,
you can do those things.
It takes some effort.
But if you ask them,
they will help you out.
And they will guide you to
make it look truly great.
So we are very happy with
what we have achieved so far.
And we would like to thank the
Worldwide Developer Team a lot.
And I'm sure that you will get
to enjoy their services as well.
Thank you.
Thank you, Magnus.
Can we go back to slides?
There we go.
One thing I should add today,
this is a little interesting.
Magnus didn't know about the little
surprise with the new camera.
We had not actually tested
this until last week.
I actually had one of the
prototype units and had to hide
from everyone and go and test it.
We had some of the Apple hardware
people that were in,
and we were using a
couple of the cameras,
and we were actually connecting
to their XServe in Sweden.
But I was really only going
two doors down to Apple.
So I was video conferencing
basically from my office in
Cupertino to Sweden and then back.
And the product manager was saying to me,
"Wow, the video is really great.
This is great.
Is this like the peer-to-peer
stuff that we're doing?" I said,
"No, we're actually going to Sweden and
back." We tested out the cameras.
Everything worked great.
I think these are going to actually
be--iSight is going to be a nice
compliment for Ameritech's offering.
Thanks, Magnus.
So this is just a kickoff session.
You guys all probably scouted
out what sessions you wanna go
to for the rest of the week.
We've tried to highlight
them in the content,
so I'm not gonna go over all of these,
but between Java, WebObjects, QuickTime,
networking, all of the things that we're
gonna be talking about this week,
there's a whole lot of Java in all of it.
Let me go ahead and
show you the last one,
sort of an enterprise side
with all the WebObjects pieces.
I encourage you to get
to all the sessions,
especially the people that are
doing the QuickTime for Java stuff.
Please go to the QuickTime API session
and give them feedback on that.
And with that, I'll give you guys our
contact information,
and I wanna thank you
very much for coming,
and we appreciate your time.
Look forward to seeing you
guys the rest of the week.